# Homework 6
### Description: you will gain experience with using gRPC and using REST requests to invoke lambda functions that you will deploy on AWS.
### Mandatory for graduate students only. Submissions from undergrad students will not be graded, but well-done homework will be **considered** when assigning the final grade.
### Grade: 5% + bonus up to 3% for using only Scala and SBT to create a single SBT project that contains a protobuf library project and its dependent project that uses the protobufs to make gRPC calls to a lambda function.
#### You can obtain this Git repo using the command ```git clone git@bitbucket.org:cs441_spring2019/homework6.git```. You cannot push your code into this repo, otherwise, your grade for this homework will be ZERO!

## Preliminaries - skip those if you already read them in the previous homework descriptions.
If you have not already done so as part of your previous homeworks, you must create your account at [BitBucket](https://bitbucket.org/), a Git repo management system. It is imperative that you use your UIC email account that has the extension @uic.edu. Once you create an account with your UIC address, BibBucket will assign you an academic status that allows you to create private repos. Bitbucket users with free accounts cannot create private repos, which are essential for submitting your homeworks and the course project. Your instructor created a team for this class named [cs441_Spring2019](https://bitbucket.org/cs441_spring2019/). Please contact your TA [Shen Wang](swang224@uic.edu) from your **UIC.EDU** account and they will add you to the team repo as developers, since they already have the admin privileges. Please use your emails from the class registration roster to add you to the team and you will receive an invitation from BitBucket to join the team. Since it is still a large class, please use your UIC email address for communications or Piazza and avoid emails from other accounts like funnybunny1992@gmail.com. If you don't receive a response within 12 hours, please contact us via Piazza, it may be a case that your direct emails went to the spam folder.

In case you have not done so, you will install [IntelliJ](https://www.jetbrains.com/student/) with your academic license, the JDK, the Scala runtime and the IntelliJ Scala plugin, the [Simple Build Toolkit (SBT)](https://www.scala-sbt.org/1.x/docs/index.html) and make sure that you can create, compile, and run Java and Scala programs. Please make sure that you can run [Java monitoring tools](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/technotes/guides/troubleshoot/tooldescr025.html) or you can choose a newer JDK and tools if you want to use a more recent one.

Please set up your account with [AWS Educate](https://aws.amazon.com/education/awseducate/). Using your UIC email address will enable you to receive free credits for running your jobs in the cloud.

You will use logging and configuration management frameworks. You will comment your code extensively and supply logging statements at different logging levels (e.g., TRACE, INFO, ERROR) to record information at some salient points in the executions of your programs. All input and configuration variables must be supplied through configuration files -- hardcoding these values in the source code is prohibited and will be punished by taking a large percentage of points from your total grade! You are expected to use [Logback](https://logback.qos.ch/) and [SLFL4J](https://www.slf4j.org/) for logging and [Typesafe Conguration Library](https://github.com/lightbend/config) for managing configuration files. These and other libraries should be exported into your project using your script [build.sbt](https://www.scala-sbt.org/1.0/docs/Basic-Def-Examples.html). These libraries and frameworks are widely used in the industry, so learning them is the time well spent to improve your resume.

As before, when writing your program code in Scala, you should avoid using **var**s and while/for loops that iterate over collections using [induction variables](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Induction_variable). Instead, you should learn to use collection methods **map**, **flatMap**, **foreach**, **filter** and many others with lambda functions, which make your code linear and easy to understand. Also, avoid mutable variables at all cost. Points will be deducted for having many **var**s and inductive variable loops without explanation why mutation is needed in your code - you can always do without it.

## Overview
In this homework, you will create and deploy your lambda functions on [AWS Lambda](https://aws.amazon.com/lambda/) and you will write a client program to invoke these lambda functions using [gRPC](https://grpc.io/) and independently a different client program to invoke the same lambda functions by using the [AWS API Gateway](https://aws.amazon.com/api-gateway/) with the requests GET and POST and DELETE.

Doing this homework enables students to put their theoretical knowledge about gRPC and REST architectural style on a firm footing in the context of creating and using lambda functions deployed in the cloud.


## Functionality
Your homework assignment consists of two interlocked parts: first, create a client program that uses gRPC to invoke a lambda calculator function deployed on AWS and second, to create a client program and the corresponding lambda function calculator(s) that use the REST methods (e.g., GET or POST) to interact. While you are free to determine how your lambda calculator works, there is a small subset of mandatory functionality that you must implement: the basic arithmetic functions +, -, /, and * and the extended functions Memory with the commands set and retrieve for storing and retrieving the last computed value.

The starting point is to follow the guide on [AWS Serverless Application Model (SAM)](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/serverless-application-model/latest/developerguide/serverless-quick-start.html). Once you follow the steps of the tutorial, you will be able to invoke a lambda function via the AWS API Gateway.

Next, you will learn how to create a [gRPC](https://grpc.io/) client program. I find this [tutorial on gRPC on HTTP/2](https://www.cncf.io/blog/2018/08/31/grpc-on-http-2-engineering-a-robust-high-performance-protocol/) very well written by Jean de Klerk, Developer Program Engineer at Google.

After that you will learn about [AWS API Gateway](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/apigateway/latest/developerguide/welcome.html) and determine how to use it to create RESTful API for your implementation of the calculator lambda function.

A guide to keep you on the right path is the [blog entry](https://blog.coinbase.com/grpc-to-aws-lambda-is-it-possible-4b29a9171d7f) that describes the process of using gRPC for invoking AWS lambda function in Go.

Excellent [guide how to create a REST service with AWS Lambda](https://blog.sourcerer.io/full-guide-to-developing-rest-apis-with-aws-api-gateway-and-aws-lambda-d254729d6992) includes instructions on how to set up and configure AWS Lambda.

## Baseline Submission
Your baseline project submission should include your implementation of lambda function calculators, a conceptual explanation in the document or in the comments in the source code of your design decisions, especially the state management part, and the documentation that describe the build and runtime process, to be considered for grading. Your project submission should include all your source code written in Scala as well as non-code artifacts (e.g., configuration files), your entire project should be buildable using the single build SBT.

## Piazza collaboration
You can post questions and replies, statements, comments, discussion, etc. on Piazza. For this homework, feel free to share your ideas, mistakes, code fragments, commands from scripts, and some of your technical solutions with the rest of the class, and you can ask and advise others using Piazza on where resources and sample programs can be found on the internet, how to resolve dependencies and configuration issues. When posting question and answers on Piazza, please select the appropriate folder, i.e., hw6 to ensure that all discussion threads can be easily located. Active participants and problem solvers will receive bonuses from the big brother :-) who is watching your exchanges on Piazza (i.e., your class instructor). However, *you must not share your codebase or specific details related how your designed the state management part!*

## Git logistics
**This is an individual homework.** Separate repositories will be created for each of your homeworks and for the course project. You will find a corresponding entry for this homework at git@bitbucket.org:cs441_spring2019/homework6.git. You will fork this repository and your fork will be private, no one else besides you, the TA and your course instructor will have access to your fork. Please remember to grant a read access to your repository to your TA and your instructor. In future, for the team homeworks and the course project, you should grant the write access to your forkmates, but NOT for this homework. You can commit and push your code as many times as you want. Your code will not be visible and it should not be visible to other students (except for your forkmates for a team project, but not for this homework). When you push the code into the remote repo, your instructor and the TA will see your code in your separate private fork. Making your fork public, pushing your code into the main repo, or inviting other students to join your fork for an individual homework will result in losing your grade. For grading, only the latest push timed before the deadline will be considered. **If you push after the deadline, your grade for the homework will be zero**. For more information about using the Git and Bitbucket specifically, please use this [link as the starting point](https://confluence.atlassian.com/bitbucket/bitbucket-cloud-documentation-home-221448814.html). For those of you who struggle with the Git, I recommend a book by Ryan Hodson on Ry's Git Tutorial. The other book called Pro Git is written by Scott Chacon and Ben Straub and published by Apress and it is [freely available](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/). There are multiple videos on youtube that go into details of the Git organization and use.

Please follow this naming convention while submitting your work : "Firstname_Lastname_hw6" without quotes, where you specify your first and last names **exactly as you are registered with the University system**, so that we can easily recognize your submission. I repeat, make sure that you will give both your TA and the course instructor the read access to your *private forked repository*.

## Discussions and submission
You can post questions and replies, statements, comments, discussion, etc. on Piazza. Remember that you cannot share your code and your solutions privately, but you can ask and advise others using Piazza and StackOverflow or some other developer networks where resources and sample programs can be found on the Internet, how to resolve dependencies and configuration issues. Yet, your implementation should be your own and you cannot share it. Alternatively, you cannot copy and paste someone else's implementation and put your name on it. Your submissions will be checked for plagiarism. **Copying code from your classmates or from some sites on the Internet will result in severe academic penalties up to the termination of your enrollment in the University**. When posting question and answers on Piazza, please select the appropriate folder, i.e., hw1 to ensure that all discussion threads can be easily located.


## Submission deadline and logistics
Saturday, May 4 at 8PM CST via the bitbucket repository. Your submission will include the code for the protobuf and your client programs including the code generated with the compiler protoc, your documentation with instructions and detailed explanations on how to assemble and deploy your submission, and a document that explains how you designed and implemented the program, and what the limitations of your implementation are. Again, do not forget, please make sure that you will give both your TA and your instructor the read access to your private forked repository. Your name should be shown in your README.md file and other documents. Your code should compile and run from the command line using the commands ```sbt clean compile test``` and ```sbt clean compile run```. Also, you project should be IntelliJ friendly, i.e., your graders should be able to import your code into IntelliJ and run from there. Use .gitignore to exlude files that should not be pushed into the repo.


## Evaluation criteria
- the maximum grade for this homework is 5% with the bonus up to 3% for using only Scala and SBT to create a single SBT project that contains a protobuf library project and its dependent project that uses the protobufs to make gRPC calls to a lambda function. Points are subtracted from this maximum grade: for example, saying that 2% is lost if some requirement is not completed means that the resulting grade will be 5%-2% => 3%; if the core homework functionality does not work, no bonus points will be given;
- the code does not work in that it does not produce a correct output or crashes: up to 5% lost;
- having less than two unit tests that test the main functionality: up to 4% lost;
- missing comments and explanations from the program: up to 3% lost;
- logging is not used in the program: up to 3% lost;
- hardcoding the input values in the source code instead of using the suggested configuration libraries: up to 4% lost;
- no instructions in README.md on how to install and run your program: up to 4% lost;
- the documentation exists but it is insufficient to understand how you assembled and deployed all components of the cloud: up to 4% lost;
- the minimum grade for this homework cannot be less than zero.

That's it, folks!